[W-16175749][PDK] gRPC client calls (#626)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: pdk/1.2/modules/ROOT/pages/policies-pdk-configure-features-grpc-request.adoc

= Performing a Unary gRPC Call
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

NOTE: To view an example policy project that makes gRPC calls, see https://github.com/mulesoft/pdk-custom-policy-examples/blob/main/simple-oauth-2-grpc-validation/README.md[Simple OAuth 2.0 gRPC Validation Policy Example^].

To interact with external services, a policy can use gRPC calls. You can only make gRPC calls from the request filter or the response filter.

Custom policies only support unary gRPC calls. Policies do not support gRPC streaming.

> To perform a gRPC call, either inject the `GrpcClient` into the `#[entrypoint]` function or the wrapper functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on where you inject the `GrpcClient`, you can make calls from the request, response, or both filters.
```
I'm suggesting this to clarify a bit the different options here. If you agree with this edit, apply also the next two comments that introduce the example code.

> * Injecting the client parameter into the `#[entrypoint]` function enables you to make calls in both the request and response filters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To enable calls in the request and response filters, inject the client parameter into the `#[entrypoint]` function:
```
Part of the previous comment.

+
[source,Rust]
----
#[entrypoint]
async fn configure(
    launcher: Launcher,
    Configuration(bytes): Configuration,
    client: grpc::GrpcClient,
) -> Result<()> {
    let config: Config = serde_json::from_slice(&bytes).unwrap();

    // Both request and the response handlers will use the client   
    let filter = on_request(|request_state| request_filter(request_state, &config, &client))
        .on_response(|response_state, request_data| {
            response_filter(response_state, request_data, &config, &client)
        });

    launcher.launch(filter).await?;
    Ok(())
}
----

> * Injecting the client parameters into one of the `on_request` or `on_response` wrapper functions enables you to only make calls in that function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To enable calls exclusively in the request or the response, inject the client parameters either in the `on_request` or `on_response` wrapper functions:
```
Part of the previous two comments.

+
[source,Rust]
----
// Handler with the logic for incoming requests
async fn request_filter(state: RequestState, conf: &Config, client: grpc::GrpcClient) {
 ...
}

#[entrypoint]
async fn configure(launcher: Launcher, Configuration(bytes): Configuration) -> Result<()> {
    let config: Config = serde_json::from_slice(&bytes).unwrap();

    // For incoming request events, using the on_request wrapper, inject the client and pass it to the request_filter handler
    launcher
        .launch(on_request(|request, client| {
            request_filter(request, &config, client)
        }))
        .await?;
    Ok(())
}
----

> NOTE: The `pdk::hl::grpc` module contains the gRPC client functionality. If you import all PDK modules (`pdk::hl::*`), you must refer to gRPC client as `grpc::GrpcClient`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The `pdk::hl::grpc` module contains the gRPC client functionality. If you import all PDK modules (`pdk::hl::*`), refer to the gRPC client as `grpc::GrpcClient`.
```

> Define your gRPC service as a parameter in your schema definition to make gRPC requests. To learn more about defining parameters, see xref:policies-pdk-create-schema-definition.adoc[]

Reviewer: Are gRPC requests the same as gRPC calls? This is a long topic that can get confusing. Is there any way to break it into smaller sub-topics? For example: 

= Performing a Unary gRPC Call
... lines 1 to 11 - (Introduction)
== Enabling gRPC Calls
... lines 13 to 62 - (Enabling/Configuring the calls)
== Defining the gRPC Service and Making Calls/Requests (if these are the same, unify terminology) 
... lines 63 to 94 (Define the service, call example).

I don't know if this structure is accurate, but right now it is not very clear to me if all of this is a required pre-configuration or if we are doing different things here. Please see if there's any way to rework a bit this section to make it more clear. Use my comment just as guidance because my knowledge in this topic is limited and my suggestions might be inaccurate.

The following code snippet provides an example schema definition for an external service:

[source,yaml]
----
properties:
      externalService:
          type: string
          format: service
----

In the policy's Rust source code, you can access the defined external service in the `Config` struct. For example, the following code snippet invokes the `HelloService` gRPC service that has the `SayHello` method:

[source,rust]
----

async fn say_hello(config: &Config, grpc_client: &grpc::GrpcClient, message: &[u8]) -> Result<Vec<u8>, grpc::GrpcClientError> {
    let response = grpc_client
        .request(&config.external_service)
        .service("HelloService")
        .method("SayHello")
        .send(message_bytes)
        .await?
        .into_inner()

    Ok(response)
}
----

NOTE: The message is raw bytes. You must explicitly serialize the message in a serialization format such as JSON.

== Protocol Buffers Messages

> The `grpc::GrpcClient` supports Protocol Buffers. To use Protocol Buffers, you must include the https://crates.io/crates/protobuf[protobuf crate] for encoding Protocol Buffers messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `grpc::GrpcClient` supports Protocol Buffers. To use Protocol Buffers, include the https://crates.io/crates/protobuf[protobuf crate] for encoding Protocol Buffers messages.
```

To configure Protocol Buffers:

> . Add the `protobuf` crate as dependency to your `Cargo.toml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the `protobuf` crate as a dependency to your `Cargo.toml` file:
```

+
[source,toml]
----
[dependencies]
pdk = { version = "1.1.0", registry = "anypoint" }
protobuf = "3.5.0"
----

. Create a folder named `proto` to place the `.proto` definition files.

. Create a file named `hello.proto` inside the `proto` folder, for example:
+
----
└─ proto/  # Contains the Protocol Buffers definition files.
   └── hello.proto # Contains the Protocol Buffers definitions for the `hello` package.
----

. Open the `hello.proto` file and copy and paste the following definitions into it:
+
[source,proto]
----
syntax = "proto2";

package hello;

service HelloService {
  rpc SayHello(HelloRequest) returns (HelloResponse);
}

message HelloRequest {
  required string greeting = 1;
}

message HelloResponse {
  required string reply = 1;
}
----

> . Add the `profobuf-codegen` crate to the `build-dependencies` section of you `Cargo.toml` file in order to make it available for the `build.rs` file created in the next step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the `profobuf-codegen` crate to the `build-dependencies` section of your `Cargo.toml` file to make it available for the `build.rs` file created in the next step:
```

+
[source,toml]
----
[build-dependencies]
pdk = { version = "1.1.0", registry = "anypoint" }
protobuf-codegen = "3.5.0"
----

> . Create a file named `build.rs` file in the root folder of your project. This following code is populated automatically in the `build.rs` file by `cargo` when your project is built:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a file named `build.rs` in the root folder of your project. The following code is populated automatically in the `build.rs` file by `cargo` when your project is built:
```

        .cargo_out_dir("protos") // Put the generated code into the cargo output dir, inside a `protos` directory.
        .run_from_script(); // Generate all.
}
----

. Add the following line in the `lib.rs` file to import the generated code:
+
[source,rust]
----
// Make the `hello` module available.
include!(concat!(env!("OUT_DIR"), "/protos/mod.rs"));
----

. Use the following code as an example of how to write a `grpc::GrpcClient` wrapper for encapsulating calls to `HelloService`:
+
[source,rust]
----
pub struct HelloClient {
   grpc_client: grpc::GrpcClient,
   service: Service,
}

impl HelloClient {
   pub fn new(grpc_client: grpc::GrpcClient, service: Service) -> Self {
      Self {
        grpc_client,
        service,
      }
   }

   pub fn say_hello(&self, request: &hello::HelloRequest) -> Result<hello::HelloResponse, GrpcClientError> {
      let response = self
        .grpc_client
        .request(&self.service)
        .service("HelloService")
        .method("SayHello")
        .protobuf() // enable Protocol Buffers support.
        .send(request)
        .await?
        into_inner();

     Ok(response)
   }
----

> . Use the wrappers by call them from an `async` context:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Use the wrappers by calling them from an `async` context:
```
